---
title: "High-density electromyographic assessment of stretch reflex activity during drop jumps from varying drop heights"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-02-01-dj_hd_emg
excerpt: 'Drop jump performance and stretch reflex response were assesed below, at, and above the drop height that produced maximal performance.'
date: 2020-02-01
venue: 'Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelekin.2019.102375'
citation: 
authors: <b>Robert W. Schuster</b>, Florian K. Paternoster, & Wolfgang Seiberl
---
## Citation 
**Schuster, R. W.**, Paternoster, F. K., & Seiberl, W. (2020). High-density electromyographic assessment of stretch reflex activity during drop jumps from varying heights. *Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology*. 50, 102375.

## Abstract  
This study investigated how drop heights and their associated drop jump performance relate to stretch reflex modulations. Eleven male subjects performed ten drop jumps from each of three individually predetermined drop heights. These were the drop height resulting in maximal performance (OPT), as well as 10 cm below (LOW) and above (HIGH) maximal performance. To quantify drop jump performance the reactive strength index, derived from force plate measures, was used. High-density surface EMG provided both stretch reflex response timing and size, as well as novel insight into the associated motor unit recruitment via muscle fiber conduction velocity estimations. These measures were examined in the vastus lateralis (VL), soleus (SOL) and gastrocnemius medialis (GM).
Drop jump performance improved by 9% (p < 0.001) from LOW to OPT and decreased by 5% (p = 0.008) from OPT to HIGH. Despite decreasing performance, stretch reflex responses were largest at HIGH. Stretch reflex responses timing did not change; staying within the short (SOL, < 60 ms) and medium (VL, GM; 60–85 ms) latency response time-frames. Motor unit recruitment appeared to change across drop heights only for VL, whereas activation intensity only changed for SOL. These results indicate that during drop jumps above OPT neuromuscular modifications result in VL no longer being maximally recruited.  
  
  
Access paper [here](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelekin.2019.102375)
