---
title: "Reliability and quality of statistical shape and deformation models constructed from optical foot scans"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-01-01-foot_ssm_reliability
excerpt: 'A group of healthy human feet were scanned twice each by two examiners and statistical shape models constructed to determine their respective reliability and repeatability.'
date: 2021-01-01
venue: 'Journal of Biomechanics'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2020.110137'
citation: '**Schuster, R. W.**, Cresswell, A. G., & Kelly, L. A. (2021). Reliability and quality of statistical shape and deformation models constructed from optical foot scans. <i>Journal of Biomechanics</i>. 115, 110137.'
---
*Abstract*  
The unique shape of modern human feet, and how they change shape when loaded are thought to be integral to effective upright gait. This unique shape, and the natural variations therein, have previously been analysed using a range of methods; from visual assessments, anthropometric measurements, and footprints, to x-ray, ultrasound and magnetic resonance images. However, these methods are often limited by their use of linear two-dimensional measures. Only recently have advances in three-dimensional (3D) scanning technology and statistical shape analysis been applied to studying 3D foot shape variations. Given their novelty, information regarding the reliability and repeatability of 3D foot scanning and shape modelling is lacking. To investigate whether repeated foot scans captured by two examiners give the same 3D shape and produce consistent statistical shape models, 17 healthy adults’ left feet were scanned while bearing half and full bodyweight, as well as minimal weight. Surface to surface distances between corresponding foot meshes and differences between shape model quality criteria were both found to be small and insignificant. The only exception being the specificity criterion for minimally loaded foot scans. Furthermore, Euclidean vectors were used to model the magnitude and direction of deformation that feet undergo as a consequence of increased loading. The deformation models showed that loading a minimally loaded foot results in greater, but less consistent, shape changes than when increasing the load on an already loaded foot. These results show that the utilized methods offer a valuable, reliable and repeatable approach to analysing foot shape and deformation.
